docs: CosmJs general tutorial (#983)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: academy/xl-cosmjs/first-steps.md

---
title: "Bank - Send Tokens"
order: 2
description: Interacting with a Cosmos SDK chain through CosmJs
tag: deep-dive
---

# Bank - Send Tokens

Now that you know what CosmJs is, you should take your first steps in using it. A basic feature of a Cosmos chain is the ability to send tokens via the `bank` module. CosmJs naturally offers functions to cover this facility. You are going to:

> 1. Use an existing test net with a key of your own.

Reviewer: I think the jargon is to use [`testnet`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Testnet) in one word, or to say `test network`.

Author: I concur.

Reviewer 2: Thank you, performing edits to correct _test net_ > _testnet_ throughout.

> 1. Use an existing test net with a key of your own.

Reviewer: I think the jargon is to use [`testnet`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Testnet) in one word, or to say `test network`.

}
```

Run again to check with `npx yarn experiment`, and you get:

```
chain id: theta-testnet-001 , height: 9507032
```

## Get a balance

Normally you would not yet have access to your user's address. However, for this exercise you need to know how many tokens Alice has, so add a temporary new command inside `runAll`: 

```typescript
console.log(
    "Alice balances:",
    await client.getAllBalances("cosmos17tvd4hcszq7lcxuwzrqkepuau9fye3dal606zf"),
)
```

`getAllBalances` is used because the default token name is not yet known. When you run it again, you get:

```
Alice balances: []
```

If you just created this account, Alice's balance is zero. Alice will need tokens to be able to send transactions. A common practice with testnets is to expose faucets (services that send you test tokens for free, within limits).

Cosmos' Theta has a dedicated [Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/669268347736686612/953697793476821092/958291295741313024) where you can ask for tokens once per day _per Discord user_.

Go to the faucet channel and get tokens for Alice:

```
$request cosmos17tvd4hcszq7lcxuwzrqkepuau9fye3dal606zf theta
```

> The faucet bot replies with a transaction hash, alone or embedded in a block explorer URL:

Author: ```suggestion
The faucet bot replies with a link to the transaction from the block explorer:
```

```
✅ Hash ID: 540484BDD342702F196F84C2FD42D63FA77F74B26A8D7383FAA5AB46E4114A9B
//Or
✅  https://testnet.cosmos.bigdipper.live/transactions/540484BDD342702F196F84C2FD42D63FA77F74B26A8D7383FAA5AB46E4114A9B
```

Check that Alice received the tokens with `npx yarn experiment`, which should return:

```
Alice balances: [ { denom: 'uatom', amount: '10000000' } ]
```

That's 10 ATOM. After this confirmation you can comment out the balance query.

## Get the faucet address

As an exercise you want Alice to send some tokens back to the faucet, so you will need its address. You can request this from the faucet bot, but it is also possible to get it using the transaction hash.

First you need to get the transaction:

```typescript
const faucetTx: IndexedTx = (await client.getTx(
    "540484BDD342702F196F84C2FD42D63FA77F74B26A8D7383FAA5AB46E4114A9B",
))!
```

> 

Author: I will add this separately to avoid bad formatting.

```suggestion

If your IDE does not do it for you, do not forget to import `IndexedTx` at the top of the file:

```typescript
import { IndexedTx } from "@cosmjs/stargate"
\`\`\`

```

> Also IndexedTx is not mentioned as an import in this tutorial yet so VScode throws an error here.

I can add that but I am generally reluctant to constantly add these details as I reckon that can turn condescending. Especially in this case where a right-click on `IndexedTx` offers the solution.

> Here you see that there is a serialized `faucetTx.tx`. Use the methods offered by `cosmjs-types` [`Tx`](https://github.com/confio/cosmjs-types/blob/a14662d/src/cosmos/tx/v1beta1/tx.ts#L230) to deserialize it:

Author: ```suggestion
Here you see that there is a serialized `faucetTx.tx`. The serialized transaction are the bytes that were sent over the testnet by the faucet. It is unintelligible to humans until you deserialize it properly. Since it is a serialized transaction, use the methods offered by `cosmjs-types` [`Tx`](https://github.com/confio/cosmjs-types/blob/a14662d/src/cosmos/tx/v1beta1/tx.ts#L230) to deserialize it:
```

```typescript
// import { Tx } from "cosmjs-types/cosmos/tx/v1beta1/tx"

const decodedTx: Tx = Tx.decode(faucetTx.tx)
```

> Next you need to deserialize the only message in it:

Author: ```suggestion
Deserializing the transaction has not deserialized its component message(s). In fact, the transaction deserializer knows how to properly deserialize a transaction, but it does not know how to do the same for messages. Messages can be of any type, and each type has its own de/serializer. Next you need to deserialize the only message in it:
```

I will complement that separately.

```typescript
// import { MsgSend } from "cosmjs-types/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/tx"

const sendMessage: MsgSend = MsgSend.decode(decodedTx.body!.messages[0].value)
```

In this message, the `fromAddress` is the faucet:

```typescript
const faucet = sendMessage.fromAddress

> ```

Author: I separated import blocks and added log outputs.

> You can also add a line to view the faucet's balances. When running, you should get:

Author: ```suggestion
Similar to how you got the balance for Alice, you can get the faucet's balance as well. Have a go at trying this yourself by copying the code to print Alice's balances. When running, you should get:
```

```

> Faucet: cosmos15aptdqmm7ddgtcrjvc5hs988rlrkze40l4q0he
> Faucet balances: [ { denom: 'uatom', amount: '867777337235' } ]

Author: ```suggestion
Faucet balances: [ { denom: 'uatom', amount: '867777337235' } ]
```

```

<ExpansionPanel title="Get the faucet address another way">

> If you want to experiment more, you can parse the `rawLog` (an _output_ of the computation) as opposed to deserializing the transaction proper (the _input_ of the computation).

Author: I would like to keep the concepts of computation _input_ and _output_.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Note the conceptual difference between`Tx` and the `rawLog`. The `Tx`, or `MsgSend`, object is an input to the computation that takes place when the transaction is included in a block. The `rawLog` is a resultant output of said computation.

```

From the `IndexedTx` you see that there is a [`rawLog`](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmjs/blob/13ce43c/packages/stargate/src/stargateclient.ts#L64), which happens to be a stringified JSON.

```typescript
const rawLog = JSON.parse(faucetTx.rawLog)
console.log(JSON.stringify(rawLog, null, 4))
```

The structure of the raw log is not always obvious, but in this example it contains:

```json
[
    {
        "events": [
            ...
            {
                "type": "coin_spent",
                "attributes": [
                    {
                        "key": "spender",
                        "value": "cosmos15aptdqmm7ddgtcrjvc5hs988rlrkze40l4q0he"
                    },
                    ...
                ]
                ...
            }
            ...
        ]
    }
]
```

Therefore your faucet address is:

```typescript
const faucet = rawLog[0].events[1].attributes[0].value
```

</ExpansionPanel>

These actions are example uses of the read-only `StargateClient`.

Now it is time for Alice to send some tokens back to the faucet.

## Prepare a signing client

> Alice cannot send tokens with the read-only `StargateClient`. She needs a _signing client_ that lets her sign transactions. Update your import line:

Author: ```suggestion
If you go through `StargateClient`'s methods, you see that it has only query-type methods. None about sending transactions.

Now, for Alice to send transactions, she needs to be able to sign them. And to be able to sign transactions, she needs access to _keys_ or _mnemonics_. Or rather she needs a client that has access to those. That is where `SigningStargateClient` comes in.

Update your import line:
```

```typescript
import { IndexedTx, SigningStargateClient, StargateClient } from "@cosmjs/stargate"
```

> VSCode's auto-complete can assist you again. When you instantiate this new client, you need to pass it a **signer**, implementing the `OfflineDirectSigner` interface. The signer needs access to Alice's **private key**, and there are several ways to accomplish this. In this example, you will use Alice's saved mnemonic.

Author: ```suggestion
VSCode's auto-complete can assist you again with this `import` line, by clicking <kbd>CTRL-SPACE</kbd> between `{` and `}`. To see its declaration, you can then right-click on the name and choose <kbd>Go to Definition</kbd>. In particular the `connectWithSigner` method is informative.

When you instantiate `SigningStargateClient`, you need to pass it a **signer**, implementing the `OfflineDirectSigner` interface. The signer needs access to Alice's **private key**, and there are several ways to accomplish this. In this example, you will use Alice's saved mnemonic.
```

Load the mnemonic as text in your code with this import:

```typescript
import { readFile } from "fs/promises"
```

> There are several implementation of `OfflineDirectSigner` available. Right-click on `OfflineDirectSigner` in VSCode and select <kbd>Find All Implementations</kbd>: `DirectSecp256k1HdWallet` is the most appropriate for this situation. Add the import:

Reviewer 3: Would be great to explain why `DirectSecp256k1HdWallet` is the most appropriate one for us.

> There are several implementation of `OfflineDirectSigner` available. Right-click on `OfflineDirectSigner` in VSCode and select <kbd>Find All Implementations</kbd>: `DirectSecp256k1HdWallet` is the most appropriate for this situation. Add the import:

Author: ```suggestion
There are several implementation of `OfflineDirectSigner` available. Right-click on `OfflineDirectSigner` in VSCode and select <kbd>Find All Implementations</kbd>: `DirectSecp256k1HdWallet`, with its `fromMnemonic` method, is the most appropriate for this situation. Add the import:
```

```typescript
const getAliceSignerFromMnemonic = async(): Promise<OfflineDirectSigner> => {
    return DirectSecp256k1HdWallet.fromMnemonic(
        (await readFile("./theta.alice.mnemonic.key")).toString(),
        {
            prefix: "cosmos",
        }
    )
}
```

Theta uses the `cosmos` address prefix. This is the default used by `DirectSecp256k1HdWallet`, and you can also mention it as shown. Now you can add in `runAll`:

```typescript
const aliceSigner: OfflineDirectSigner = await getAliceSignerFromMnemonic()
const signingClient = await SigningStargateClient.connectWithSigner(rpc, aliceSigner)
```

Check that it works like the read-only client, from which [it inherits](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmjs/blob/0f0c9d8a754cbf01e17acf51d3f2dbdeaae60757/packages/stargate/src/signingstargateclient.ts#L147), by adding:

```typescript
console.log("chain id:", await signingClient.getChainId(), ", height:", await signingClient.getHeight())
```

Run it, and confirm that it recovers Alice's address as expected:

```typescript
const alice = (await aliceSigner.getAccounts())[0].address

> ```

Author: I think I covered that.

                amount: "100000",
            },
        ],
        {
            amount: [{ denom: "uatom", amount: "500" }],
            gas: "200000",
        },
    )
    console.log("Transfer result:", result)
    console.log("Alice balance after:", await client.getAllBalances(alice))
    console.log("Faucet balance after:", await client.getAllBalances(faucet))
}

runAll()
```

</ExpansionPanel>

This concludes your first use of CosmJs.

Note that you connected to a running test net. Therefore, you depended on someone else to have a blockchain running, and to open a publicly available RPC port and faucet. What if you wanted to try with your own blockchain?

## With a locally started chain

The easiest option is to reuse the `simd` chain that you started in a [previous module](../3-running-a-chain/node-api-and-cli.md). Make sure that you have created two accounts, Alice and Bob. You also sent tokens using `simd`. Be sure to credit enough tokens to Alice.

When you finally launch `simd`, you see the line:

```sh
$ ./build/simd start
...
4:37PM INF Starting RPC HTTP server on 127.0.0.1:26657 module=rpc-server
...
```

This is the port to which you connect CosmJs.

> ## Prepare for `simd`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Preparing your keys
```

```sh
$ ./build/simd keys export alice --unsafe --unarmored-hex
```

You get a 64-digit-long hex value. Copy-paste it into a new `simd.alice.private.key` file in your `cosmjs-template` folder. The `.gitignore` was already configured earlier to ignore it, which mitigates the risk.

<HighlightBox type="tip">

If you cannot remember which alias you gave your keys, `list` them:

```sh
$ ./build/simd keys list
- address: cosmos1c3srguwnzah5nd4cn49shltvr6tsrcl2jwn8je
  name: alice
  pubkey: '{"@type":"/cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey","key":"AhR7SWWDsaSxBD9r/mIhbVOWap70jA3WpBIqjOJo4Dwp"}'
  type: local
- address: cosmos1umpxwaezmad426nt7dx3xzv5u0u7wjc0kj7ple
  name: bob
  pubkey: '{"@type":"/cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey","key":"Av1VW23/laXWtbwWwOUHCvjjeLLqbdzazRneeRsE/shL"}'
  type: local
```

</HighlightBox>

## Update your script

With the new elements in place, you can update your script. Change `rpc` and set `faucet` to Bob's address:

```typescript
const rpc = "http://127.0.0.1:26657"
const faucet = "cosmos1umpxwaezmad426nt7dx3xzv5u0u7wjc0kj7ple"
```

> Next, add a function to create Alice's signer. In VSCode, right-click on `OfflineDirectSigner` again and select <kbd>Find All Implementations</kbd>: `DirectSecp256k1Wallet` is the more appropriate choice this time.

Author: ```suggestion
Next, add a function to create Alice's signer. In VSCode, right-click on `OfflineDirectSigner` again and select <kbd>Find All Implementations</kbd>: `DirectSecp256k1Wallet`, with it `fromKey` method, is the more appropriate choice this time.
```

Add the import:

```typescript
import { DirectSecp256k1Wallet, OfflineDirectSigner } from "@cosmjs/proto-signing"
```

In `DirectSecp256k1Wallet` the `fromKey` factory function needs a `Uint8Array`. Fortunately, CosmJs includes a utility to convert a hexadecimal string into a `Uint8Array`. Import it:

```typescript
import { fromHex } from "@cosmjs/encoding"
```

Now create a new function to get a signer:

```typescript
const getAliceSignerFromPriKey = async(): Promise<OfflineDirectSigner> => {
    return DirectSecp256k1Wallet.fromKey(
        fromHex((await readFile("./simd.alice.private.key")).toString()),
        "cosmos",
    )
}
```

> The address prefix is `"cosmos"`, as can be seen in Alice's address. Insert it to replace `getAliceSignerFromMnemonic`. Also change the token unit from `uatom` to `stake`. Experiment with adjusting the values as desired. Run it and confirm the output is as expected.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The address prefix is `"cosmos"`, as can be seen in Alice's address. Insert it to replace `getAliceSignerFromMnemonic`. Also change the token unit from `uatom` to `stake`, because this is the default token when using `simapp`. Experiment with adjusting the values as desired. Run it and confirm the output is as expected.
```

1. Use an existing test network (testnet) with a key of your own.
2. Run basic CosmJS commands in a CLI script.

Additionally, you can choose to:

1. Start a local chain that exposes RPCs.
2. Run the same basic CosmJS commands, but for this local chain.

Along the way, you will learn CosmJS concepts.

## Script preparation

A small, ready-made repository exists so you can experiment with CosmJS. Clone it from [here](https://github.com/b9lab/cosmjs-sandbox), and you will need [NodeJs](https://nodejs.org/en/download/). If you open the folder in [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/Download), the IDE should give you all the coding help you require. In the cloned folder you need to install the required modules:

```sh
$ npm install
```

Create a new file named `experiment.ts`. In it, put these lines to confirm it works:

```typescript [https://github.com/b9lab/cosmjs-sandbox/blob/3fe8942/experiment.ts#L1-L5]
const runAll = async(): Promise<void> => {
    console.log("TODO")
}

runAll()
```

> To execute, this Typescript file needs to be [compiled into Javascript](https://github.com/deus-labs/cosmjs-template/blob/main/tsconfig.json#L3) before [being interpreted](https://github.com/deus-labs/cosmjs-template/blob/main/package.json#L25) by NodeJs. Add it as a run target in `package.json`:

Author: Since the correct link is already on line 42, I would remove the link on line 40.

```

Check that Alice received the tokens with `npx yarn experiment`, which should return:

```
Alice balances: [ { denom: 'uatom', amount: '10000000' } ]
```

`uatom` is the indivisible token unit on the Testnet. It is short for micro-ATOM, or µ-ATOM. So 10 million `uatom` equal 10 ATOM. After this confirmation you can comment out the balance query.

## Get the faucet address

As an exercise you want Alice to send some tokens back to the faucet, so you will need its address. You can request this from the faucet bot, but it is also possible to get it using the transaction hash in `experiment.ts`.

First you need to get the transaction.

Add the necessary import at the top:

```typescript [https://github.com/b9lab/cosmjs-sandbox/blob/723d2a9/experiment.ts#L1]
import { IndexedTx, StargateClient } from "@cosmjs/stargate"
```

Then, make sure you replace the hash with the one you received from the faucet bot.

```typescript [https://github.com/b9lab/cosmjs-sandbox/blob/723d2a9/experiment.ts#L14-L16]
const faucetTx: IndexedTx = (await client.getTx(
    "540484BDD342702F196F84C2FD42D63FA77F74B26A8D7383FAA5AB46E4114A9B",
))!
```

A good IDE could help you to add necessary imports.

> 

Author: Ok. It is part of my slow drip of "you should wean yourself of such detailed instructions"

  tx: Uint8Array(321) [
     10, 148,   1,  10, 145,   1,  10,  28,  47,  99, 111, 115,
    109, 111, 115,  46,  98,  97, 110, 107,  46, 118,  49,  98,
    101, 116,  97,  49,  46,  77, 115, 103,  83, 101, 110, 100,
     18, 113,  10,  45,  99, 111, 115, 109, 111, 115,  49,  53,
     97, 112, 116, 100, 113, 109, 109,  55, 100, 100, 103, 116,
     99, 114, 106, 118,  99,  53, 104, 115,  57,  56,  56, 114,
    108, 114, 107, 122, 101,  52,  48, 108,  52, 113,  48, 104,
    101,  18,  45,  99, 111, 115, 109, 111, 115,  49,  55, 116,
    118, 100,  52, 104,
    ... 221 more items
  ],
  gasUsed: 76657,
  gasWanted: 200000
}
```

> You see that there is a serialized `faucetTx.tx` of type `Uint8Array`. The serialized transaction are the bytes (i.e. `Uint8`) that were sent over the testnet by the faucet. It is unintelligible to humans until you deserialize it properly. Since it is a serialized transaction, use the methods offered by `cosmjs-types` [`Tx`](https://github.com/confio/cosmjs-types/blob/a14662d/src/cosmos/tx/v1beta1/tx.ts#L230) to deserialize it.

Author: I think purists will say this is not JSON but a Javascript object.

runAll()
```

> To execute, this Typescript file needs to be compiled into Javascript before being interpreted by NodeJs. As you can see, we've already added this for you as a run target in `package.json`:

Author: ```suggestion
To execute, this Typescript file needs to be compiled into Javascript before being interpreted by NodeJs. Add this as a run target in `package.json`:
```
To keep it in line with the style of other calls to action with the result in a code block and the link to the done work.
@nooomski

✅  https://testnet.cosmos.bigdipper.live/transactions/540484BDD342702F196F84C2FD42D63FA77F74B26A8D7383FAA5AB46E4114A9B
```

Check that Alice received the tokens with `npx yarn experiment`, which should return:

```
Alice balances: [ { denom: 'uatom', amount: '10000000' } ]
```

That's 10 ATOM. After this confirmation you can comment out the balance query.

## Get the faucet address

> As an exercise you want Alice to send some tokens back to the faucet, so you will need its address. You can request this from the faucet bot, but it also possible to get it using the transaction hash.

Author: ```suggestion
As an exercise you want Alice to send some tokens back to the faucet, so you will need its address. You can request this from the faucet bot, but it is also possible to get it using the transaction hash.
```
@AndrewB9lab

## Send tokens

> Alice can now send some tokens back to the faucet, but to do so she will also need to pay the network gas fee. If she wants to semd back 1% of her holdings (`100000uatom`), how much gas should she put, and at what price? 

Author: ```suggestion
Alice can now send some tokens back to the faucet, but to do so she will also need to pay the network gas fee. If she wants to send back 1% of her holdings (`100000uatom`), how much gas should she put, and at what price? 
```
@AndrewB9lab

    .attributes.find((attribute: any) => attribute.key === "spender").value
```

Although the above is a perfectly valid way to extract specific values from a transaction's message, it is not the recommended way to do so. The benefit of importing the message types is that you don't have to manually dig through the raw log of each `Tx` you're looking to use in your application.

> </ExpansionPanel>

Author: ```suggestion

</ExpansionPanel>
```

Update your import line:

```typescript [https://github.com/b9lab/cosmjs-sandbox/blob/4168b97/experiment.ts#L3]
import { IndexedTx, SigningStargateClient, StargateClient } from "@cosmjs/stargate"
```

Let's have a look at its declaration by right-clicking on the `SigningStargateClient` in your imports and choosing <kbd>Go to Definition</kbd>. 

As you can see, when you instantiate `SigningStargateClient` by using the [`connectWithSigner`](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmjs/blob/0f0c9d8/packages/stargate/src/signingstargateclient.ts#L156) method, you need to pass it a [**signer**](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmjs/blob/0f0c9d8/packages/stargate/src/signingstargateclient.ts#L158). In this case, we'll be using the [`OfflineDirectSigner`](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmjs/blob/0f0c9d8/packages/proto-signing/src/signer.ts#L21-L24) interface.

> <HighlightBox type="info">

Author: ```suggestion
<HighlightBox type="info">

```

The recommended way to encode messages is by using `OfflineDirectSigner`, which uses Protobuf. However, hardware wallets such as Ledger do not support this and still require the legacy Amino encoder. If your app requires Amino support, you'll have to use the `OfflineAminoSigner`.

You can read more about encoding [here](https://docs.cosmos.network/master/core/encoding.html).

> </HighlightBox>

Author: ```suggestion

</HighlightBox>

```
